>> A controversial theory on
consciousness has just been
tested.
Could consciousness be
explained by quantum effects
in the brain?
>> Can we actually point to
things that are happening that
we can attribute to
consciousness itself?
>> This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A 30-year-old theory on
consciousness, called
orchestrated objective
reduction, posits
that consciousness could live in
tiny microtubules in the brain,
or as "New Scientist" explains,
quote, "Brain microtubules are
the place where gravitational
instabilities in the structure
of spacetime break the
delicate quantum superposition
between particles.
And this gives rise
to consciousness."
The theory was first
introduced in the 1990s
by physicist Roger Penrose
and anesthesiologist, Stuart
Hameroff, but was
believed to be unstable
and was therefore, regarded
as a fringe theory at best.
But now, "New Scientist"
reports the theory has
been put to the
test, writing, quote,
"Experiments show
that anesthetic drugs
reduce how long tiny
structures found in brain cells
can sustain suspected
quantum excitations.
As anesthetic switches
consciousness on and off,
the results may implicate
these structures,
called microtubules, as a nexus
of our conscious experience."
In one experiment,
Jack Tuszynski
at the University of
Alberta shone blue light
on microtubules, the
hollow skeletal structure
inside plant and animal
cells, to see how they react.
The light was caught in the
microtubules then re-admitted,
a process called delayed
luminescence, which they say
is comparable to how the human
brain processes information,
and they argue could explain
the fundamental workings
of the brain and consciousness.
The second part
of the experiment
was to repeat it, but in
the presence of anesthetic.
The anesthetic suppressed
the delayed luminescence
in the microtubules,
meaning the light was
re-emitted faster after
the anesthetic shut down
the microtubule.
So what does it all mean?
Tuszynski believes that
if turning consciousness
on and off via
microtubules, that
could be the beginning
of our consciousness.
However, Fred Alan Wolf,
physicists, lecturer and author
of "Taking the Quantum Leap,"
is skeptical about the role
of microtubules.
>> Somehow, I don't feel
microtubules are the final
answer, if at all the answer.
Maybe it's the emission of
the light that has nothing
to do with consciousness,
that maybe we're
knocking out the microtubules
by putting anesthesia onto them.
So that was the hypothesis,
the guess, the time together
of the timing of the
emission of re-admitted light
to add a seizure
to consciousness.
So how would you prove it?
I mean, it's an
interesting concept.
Who knows whether
it's right or not.
I doubt if it's right.
It's too simple.
>> As someone who has studied
consciousness for decades,
what does Fred Alan Wolfe
think is the answer?
>> What consciousness is
is very difficult to say.
A better line of
research would be
to try to determine
what consciousness does.
Can we actually
point to things that
are happening that
we can attribute
to consciousness itself?
>> Much more testing is needed
on the microtubule hypothesis.
Even to Tuszynski himself
told "New Scientist,"
quote, "We're not at the
level of interpreting
this physiologically,
saying, yeah, this
is where consciousness begins.
But it may."
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.